Improve troubleshooting (#1958)
metallb/metallb: website/content/troubleshooting/index.md

---
title: Troubleshooting MetalLB
weight: 6
---

## General concepts

> MetalLB's purpouse is to attract traffic directed to the LoadBalancer IP to the cluster nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MetalLB's purpose is to attract traffic directed to the LoadBalancer IP to the cluster nodes.
```

> Once the traffic lands on a node, MetalLB's responsability is finished and the rest should be handled by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the traffic lands on a node, MetalLB's responsibility is finished and the rest should be handled by
```

On the other hand, if we want to understand why a service with an assigned IP is not being advertised, the speakers
are the components to check.

## Valid Configuration

In order to work properly, MetalLB must be fed with a valid configuration.

The MetalLB's configuration is the composition of multiple resources, such as `IPAddressPools`, `L2Advertisements`,
`BGPAdvertisements` and so on. The validation is done to the configuration as a whole, and because of that it doesn't
make sense to say that a single piece of the configuration is not valid.

The MetalLB's behavior with regards to an invalid configuration is to **mark it as stale and keep working
with the last valid one**.

Each single component validates the configuration for the part that is relevant to its function, so it might
happen that the controller validates a configuration that the speaker marks as not valid.

### Checking if a configuration is valid

There are two ways to see if a configuration is not valid:

- check for errors in the logs of the given component. Config errors are on the form `failed to parse the configuration`
plus other insights about the failure.

> - look at the `metallb_k8s_client_config_stale_bool` metric on prometheus, which tells if the given component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- look at the `metallb_k8s_client_config_stale_bool` metric on Prometheus, which tells if the given component
```

is running on a stale (obsolete) configuration

Note: the fact that the logs contain an `invalid configuration` log does not necessarily mean that the last loaded
configuration is not valid.

> ## Troubleshooting IP assignement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Troubleshooting IP assignment
```

The controller performs the IP allocation to the services and it logs any possible issue.

> Things that may cause the assignement not to work are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Things that may cause the assignment not to work are:
```

- there is at least one IPAddressPool compatible with the service (including the selectors!)
- if the service is dual stack, there is at least one IPAddressPool compatible with both IPV4
and IPV6 addresses
- if the service asks for a specific IP, an IPAddressPool providing that IP exists and its selectors
are compatible with the service
- if the service asks for a specific IP used also by other services, make sure that they respect the
sharing properties described in the [official docs](https://metallb.universe.tf/usage/#ip-address-sharing).

## Troubleshooting service advertisements

### General concepts

> Each speaker publishes a `announcing from node "xxx" with protocol "bgp"` event associated to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each speaker publishes an `announcing from node "xxx" with protocol "bgp"` event associated with the
```

service it is announcing.

In case of L2, only one speaker will announce the service, while in case of BGP multiple speakers
will announce the service from multiple nodes.

A `kubectl describe svc <service-name>` will show the events related to the service, and with that the
speaker(s) that are announcing the services.

A given speaker won't advertise the service if:

- there are no active endpoints backing the service
- the service has `externalTrafficPolicy=local` and there are no running endpoints on the speaker's node
- there are no L2Advertisements / BGPAdvertisements matching the speaker node (if node selectors are specified)

> - the k8s api reports "network not available" on the speaker's node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the Kubernetes API reports "network not available" on the speaker's node
```

## MetalLB says it advertises the service but reaching the service does not work

### Checking the L2 advertisement works

> In order to have MetalLB advertise via L2, a **L2Advertisement instance must be created**. This is different from the original

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to have MetalLB advertise via L2, an **L2Advertisement instance must be created**. This is different from the original
```

MetalLB configuration so please follow the docs and ensure you created one.

> `arping <loadbalancer ip>` from a host on the same L2 subnet will show what mac address is associated to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`arping <loadbalancer ip>` from a host on the same L2 subnet will show what mac address is associated with
```

the Loadbalancer IP by MetalLB.

```bash
$ arping -I ens3 192.168.1.240
ARPING 192.168.1.240 from 192.168.1.35 ens3
Unicast reply from 192.168.1.240 [FA:16:3E:5A:39:4C]  1.077ms
Unicast reply from 192.168.1.240 [FA:16:3E:5A:39:4C]  1.321ms
Unicast reply from 192.168.1.240 [FA:16:3E:5A:39:4C]  0.883ms
Unicast reply from 192.168.1.240 [FA:16:3E:5A:39:4C]  0.968ms
^CSent 4 probes (1 broadcast(s))
Received 4 response(s)
```

> By design, MetalLB replies with the mac address of the interface it received the ARP request from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By design, MetalLB replies with the MAC address of the interface it received the ARP request from.
```

```bash
$ tcpdump -n -i ens3 arp src host 192.168.1.240
tcpdump: verbose output suppressed, use -v or -vv for full protocol decode
listening on ens3, link-type EN10MB (Ethernet), capture size 262144 bytes
17:04:40.667263 ARP, Reply 192.168.1.240 is-at fa:16:3e:5a:39:4c, length 46
17:04:41.667485 ARP, Reply 192.168.1.240 is-at fa:16:3e:5a:39:4c, length 46
17:04:42.667572 ARP, Reply 192.168.1.240 is-at fa:16:3e:5a:39:4c, length 46
17:04:43.667545 ARP, Reply 192.168.1.240 is-at fa:16:3e:5a:39:4c, length 46
^C
4 packets captured
6 packets received by filter
0 packets dropped by kernel
```

If no replies are received, it might be that ARP requests are blocked somehow. Anti MAC spoofing mechanisms are
a pretty common reason for that.

In order to understand if this is the case, you must use TCPDump on the node that where the speaker elected to
announce the service is running and see if the ARP requests are making through. At the same time, you need to
check on the host if the ARP replies are coming back.

Additionally, the speaker produces a `got ARP request for service IP, sending response` debug log whenever it receives
an ARP request.

> If multiple macs are returned for the same LB IP, this might be because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If multiple MACs are returned for the same LB IP, this might be because:
```

- Multiple speakers are replying to the ARP requests, because some kind of brain split scenario. This should be visible
in the logs of the speakers

> - The IP assigned to the service was associated also to some other interface in the L2 segment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The IP assigned to the service was associated also with some other interface in the L2 segment
```

- The CNI might be replying to ARP requests associated to the LB IP

If the L2 interface selector is used but there are no compatible interfaces on the node elected, MetalLB will
produce an event on the Service which should be visible when doing `kubectl describe svc <service-name>`.

### Checking if the BGP advertisement works

In order to have MetalLB advertise via BGP, a **BGPAdvertisement instance must be created**.

> Advertising via BGP means announcing the nodes as next hop for the route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Advertising via BGP means announcing the nodes as the next hop for the route.
```

Among the speakers that are supposed to advertise the IP, pick one and check if:

- The BGP session is up
- The IP is being advertised

The status of the session can be seen via the `metallb_bgp_session_up` metric.

#### With native mode

The information can be found on the logs of the speaker container of the speaker pod, which will produce logs
like `BGP session established` or `BGP session down`. It will also log `failed to send BGP update` in case of
advertisement failure.

#### With FRR

> The frr container in the speaker pod can be queried in order to understand the status of the session / advertisements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FRR container in the speaker pod can be queried in order to understand the status of the session / advertisements.
```

Useful commands are:

> - `vtysh show running-conf` to see the current frr configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `vtysh show running-conf` to see the current FRR configuration
```

- `vtysh show bgp neigh <neigh-ip>` to see the status of the session. Established is the value related to a healthy BGP
session
- `vtysh show ipv4 / ipv6` to see the status of the advertisements

#### Invalid FRR Configuration (FRR Mode)

> The frr configuration that the speaker produces might be invalid. When this is the case, the speaker container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FRR configuration that the speaker produces might be invalid. When this is the case, the speaker container
```

will produce a `reload error` log.

Also, the logs of the `reloader` might show if the configuration file was invalid.

#### If the BGP session is not established but the configuration looks fine

Things to check are:

- The parameters of the BGP session (including ASNs and passwords)
- The logs of the FRR container
- Use TCPDump on the nodes to see what is happening to the BGP session (remember to use the right port in case you overrode it!)

#### Check the routing table on the router

If the configuration and the logs look fine on MetalLB's side, another thing to check is the routing table
on the routers corresponding to the `BGPPeer`s.

> ### Troubleshooting when the service is announced correctly but still not reacheable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Troubleshooting when the service is announced correctly but still not reachable
```

Networking is complex and there are multiple places where it might fail. TCPDump might help
to understand where the traffic stops working.

In order to narrow down the issue, TCPDump can be used:

- on the node
- on the endpoint pod

If the traffic doesn't reach the node, it might be a network infrastructure or a MetalLB issue.
If the traffic reaches the node but not the pod, this is likely to be a CNI issue.

#### Intermittent traffic

> Sometimes the LoadBalancer service is intermittent. This might because of multiple factors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes the LoadBalancer service is intermittent. This might be because of multiple factors:
```

> - The entry point is different every time (especially with BGP, where we expose ecmp routes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The entry point is different every time (especially with BGP, where we expose ECMP routes)
```

- The L2 leader for a given LB IP is bouncing from one node to another
- The endpoints are constantly restarting (all, or just some)
- Some endpoints are replying correctly, some others are not

#### Limiting the scope of the issue

Sometimes, narrowing down the scope helps. With many nodes and many endpoints is hard to find the right place
where to dump the traffic.

> One way to make the triaging simpleris to limit the advertisement **to one single node** (using the node selector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way to make the triaging simpler is to limit the advertisement **to one single node** (using the node selector
```

in the BGPAdvertisement / L2Advertisement) and to limit the service's endpoints to one single pod.

By doing this, the path of the traffic will be clear and it will be easy to understand if the issue
is caused only by a subset of the nodes or when the pod lives on a different node, for example.

> ## Collecting informations for a bug report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Collecting information for a bug report
```

If after following the suggestions of this guide, a MetalLB bug is the primary suspect, you need to file a
bug report with some information.

> In order to provide a meaningful bug report, the information of which phase of advertising a service of type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to provide a meaningful bug report, the information on which phase of advertising a service of type
```

LoadBalancer is failing is greatly appreciated. Some good examples are:

- MetalLB is not replying to ARP requests

> - The service ip is not advertised via BGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The service IP is not advertised via BGP
```

- The service is being advertised but only from a subset of the nodes
- The service is advertised but I don't see the traffic with tcpdump

Some bad examples are:

- I can't curl the service
- MetalLB doesn't work

Additionally, the following info must be provided:

### The logs and the yaml output of all the CRs

> Setting the loglevel to debug will allow MetalLB to provide more informations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting the loglevel to debug will allow MetalLB to provide more information.
```

Both the helm chart and the MetalLB operator provide a convenient way to set the loglevel to debug:

- The helm chart provides a `.controller.loglevel` and a `.speaker.loglevel` field

> - The metallb operator provides a loglevel field in the MetalLB CRD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The MetalLB Operator provides a loglevel field in the MetalLB CRD
```
